---
layout: post
title: Reading Response "The Interpreter"
date: 2020-12-02 
img: TIR.jpg
tags: [Blog, The Interpreter]
---
Suki Kim's “The Interpreter” tells the story of Suzie Park and the mysterious death of her parents and the disappearance of her sister.

Firstly, I would like to address the portrayal of the Korean and American culture displayed in the novel. I found it fascinating how the two different cultures were shown and explored. Suzie's Korean side was often explained and made me as the reader aware of issues that a Korean immigrant has to face when living in America. A great example for that was the name issue during the hearing of Kim Lee. It was shocking to hear that Americans (in the novel) have so little respect for the Korean culture, as they simply would not make the effort to acknowledge how their name system works, calling him Mr. Lee even though it should be Mr. Kim. What also stuck out to me was Suzy's upbringing opposed to other children. Because her parents were immigrants they always had to move where the jobs were and work all day long, which meant that the sisters were often alone, so Suzy never had a constant in her life. Due to her interpreting job, one also becomes aware of Suzy's struggle of being stuck between these two cultures.

For Suzy as the main character there are also some things I would like to address. Suzy does not have healthy relationships (Damian and Michael) and she often seems lethargic and depressed. The mystery of her parents' death haunts her, especially because she had no contact with them for the last five years. What struck me as odd, was that Suzy never questioned anything her family did until her parents died and her sister disappeared. Even then, she does investigate the murder of her parents but does not question and investigate everything that she could, for example the mysterious phone calls and the irises delivered to her every year around her parents’ death. In my opinion this showed that Suzy did care about her family but is afraid to discover the truth, as if deep down she knew since she was young, that something was off.

Furthermore, her relationship with Grace is also something that stood out to me. Throughout the novel the parallels between Suzy and Grace were numerous. It seemed like whatever Grace did, Suzy did as well. At first, I thought that Suzy was jealous of Grace as she was always regarded as the prettier one, her parents gave her more attention (why that was Suzy gets to learn much later) and the boys really liked her. It seemed like she copied her because she wanted to be like Grace. After I finished reading the novel I realized that Suzy probably did the same things because she did not really knew her sister and wanted to feel closer to Grace through copying her actions. However, in the end Suzy was not even sure who she was anymore. Additionally, I was surprised by the reveal that Grace knew who killed their parents but did not tell anyone, especially Suzy.

Concerning the plot, the slow pace in the first half of the novel did not bother me. I quite enjoyed the jumps between the present and the past. It gave me more insight into Suzy’s childhood and her upbringing, already creating an awareness for the oddities in her past. Her parent’s involvement with the INS was also a pretty surprising revelation. Additionally, the mystery shift from the murder of Suzy’s parents to Grace’s involvement and her sudden disappearance was an interesting game changer. For me, the novel also has an open/ambiguous ending, as we just get to know what happened to Suzy's parents but not what happened to Grace (aside from her  involvement with the KK that (kind of) led to her parents’ death). I also enjoyed how the novel played with atmosphere, as it often expressed the current moods linguistically, for example with weather conditions or very short sentences.

In the end I would say that the novel was interesting despite the long story, as it covers multiple complex and interesting aspects. For me, “The Interpreter” has a lot of room to interpret, looking at both characters and plot. It was a very different reading experience for me as the novel was not like any other mystery novel I read so far.
