---
layout: post
title: Reading Response "Catching Teller Crow"
date: 2021-02-03
img: CTCR.jpg
tags: [Blog, Catching Teller Crow]
---
The story of  Ambelin & Ezekiel Kwaymullina‘s novel “Catching Teller Crow” revolves around the murder investigation in a burned down children's home, which is investigated by Michael Teller and his dead daughter Beth. The reader gets introduced to other important characters during the story like Isobel Catching and Crow.

First of all, I really enjoyed reading this novel as the story and its mystery is very well thought out. Structure wise the novel is also rather interesting as the focalization switches between Beth and Catching whereas Beth’s chapters are written in prose and Catching’s written in free verse. Additionally, Catching’s chapters are actually a story within the story and they are way more mysterious and complex then the frame narrative. Plot wise the novel is unique because three of its main characters are dead and both narratives were told by one of them. Furthermore, the connection between the investigation of the murder within the children's home and Catching’s story make for an interesting plot twist.

Beth Teller was only 16 when she was involved in a car accident and died. However, she is still part of the real world as a ghost and her father Michael is the only person that can still see her. The relationship between Beth and her father is therefore rather difficult as her father is still grieving her death and blames himself for what happened, whereas Beth feels responsible for her father’s sadness, which leads to her decision to stay with him. Her decision leads to difficulties as her father is constantly reminded that he lost his daughter and Beth keeps getting angry because she cannot do anything for her father anymore. Beth’s decision to stay is challenged when the reader gets introduced to Isobel Catching, a drug addict and eyewitness of the fire of the children's home. Catching is a mystery herself as she can also see Beth and over the cause of the novel tells Beth and her father about her life. At some point the reader gets aware of the fact that the story Catching is telling, however unbelievable it sounds, is actually connected to the murder investigation that Michael Teller is leading. For me, it was fascinating to learn about Catching’s past and with every added part one can speculate about the meaning of her story.

The most captivating thing about the novel for me were the last two chapters as they uncovered the truth about both mysteries. It was rather shocking to find out that girls had been kidnapped from the town/the children's home for over 20 years without any investigation, because one of the police officers was actually involved in the crime. It was also a big revelation that Catching is not the eyewitness of the fire but was one of those kidnapped girls and has been already dead the moment she met Beth and her father. It also moved me to tears when in the end Beth finally decides that it is time for her to move on and she says goodbye to her father and leaves together with Catching and Crow. Over the course of the whole novel the reader could see that Isobel Catching and her story saved Michael and Beth Teller from a lifetime of despair, as she made both of them realize that they had to let go what happened and start to begin anew without each other.

For me, this was the most interesting novel that we had to read in this course as I enjoyed the merging of the real world and the ghost/spirit world. I also loved the combination of two mysteries, which in the end lead to a very grand finale where everything is uncovered and the story becomes full circle. I also enjoyed how the novel incorporated several different themes such as death and grief but also love, friendship and family.

